feat(gatsby): Page build optimisations for incremental data changes (#21523)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/page-build-optimizations-for-incremental-data-changes.md

---

Building sites with large amounts of content (10,000s nodes upwards) is relatively fast with Gatsby. However, some projects might start to experience issues when adopting CI/CD principles - continuously building and deploying. Gatsby rebuilds the complete app on each `gatsby build` which means the complete app also needs to be deployed. Doing this each time a small data change occurs unnecessarily increases demand on CPU, memory, and bandwidth.

One solution to these problems might be to use [Gatsby Cloud's Build features](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/cloud/).

For projects that require self-hosted environments, where Gatsby Cloud would not be an option, being able to only deploy the content that has changed or is new (incremental data changes, you might say) would help reduce build times, deployment times and demand on resources.

For more info on the standard build process please see [overview of the gatsby build process](/docs/overview-of-the-gatsby-build-process/)

## How to use

To enable this enhancement, use the environment variable `GATSBY_EXPERIMENTAL_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES=true` in your `gatsby build` command, for example:

> `GATSBY_EXPERIMENTAL_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES=true node ./node_modules/.bin/gatsby build`

Reviewer: Should this be just `GATSBY_EXPERIMENTAL_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES=true gatsby build`? Why do we need to use `node <path_to_bin> build` here?

+ Updated page: /about
+ Updated page: /accounts/example
+ info Deleted pages:
+ Deleted page: /test

Done in 154.501 sec
```

- `--write-to-file` creates two files in the `.cache` folder, with lists of the changes paths in the build assets (`public`) folder.

  - `newPages.txt` will contain a list of paths that have changed or are new
  - `deletedPages.txt` will contain a list of paths that have been deleted

If there are no changed or deleted paths, then the relevant files will not be created in the `.cache` folder.

## More information

- This enhancement works by comparing the page data from the previous build to the new page data. This creates a list of page directories that are passed to the static build process

- To enable this build option you will need to set an environment variable, so you will need access to set variables in your build environment

- At the end of each build, gatsby creates a `redux.state` file in `/.cache` that contains the all previous build data. You will need to persist the `.cache/redux.state` between builds, allowing for comparison, if there is no `redux.state` file located in the `/.cache` folder then a full build will be triggered

> - Any code or static query changes (templates, components, source handling, new plugins etc) creates a new webpack compilation hash and triggers a full build

Reviewer: We are pretty much done with logic / feature so we should make edits to documentation here to reflect additional restricitions that we had to add:
- We should add a note that this env var will not work in `gatsby develop`
- We should add a note that you should use the env var consistently (because switching between using it and not using will clear the cache)

---
title: Experimental Page Build Optimizations for Incremental Data Changes
---

Building sites with large amounts of content (10,000s nodes upwards) is relatively fast with Gatsby. However, some projects might start to experience issues when adopting CI/CD principles - continuously building and deploying. Gatsby rebuilds the complete app on each `gatsby build` which means the complete app also needs to be deployed. Doing this each time a small data change occurs unnecessarily increases demand on CPU, memory, and bandwidth.

One solution to these problems might be to use [Gatsby Cloud's Build features](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/cloud/).

> For projects that require self-hosted environments, where Gatsby Cloud would not be an option, being able to only deploy the content that has changed or is new (incremental data changes, you might say) would help reduce build times, deployment times and demand on resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For projects that require self-hosted environments, where Gatsby Cloud would not be an option, deploying only the content that has changed or is new (incremental data changes, you might say) can help reduce build times, deployment times and demand on resources.
```

`GATSBY_EXPERIMENTAL_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES=true gatsby build --log-pages`

This will run the Gatsby build process, but only build pages that have data changes since your last build. If there are any changes to code (JS, CSS) the bundling process returns a new webpack compilation hash which causes all pages to be rebuilt.

### Reporting what has been built

You may want to retrieve a list of the pages that were built. For example, if you want to perform a sync action in your CI/CD pipeline.

To list the paths in the build assets (`public`) folder, you can use one (or both) of the following arguments in your `build` command.

- `--log-pages` parameter will output all the file paths that were updated or deleted at the end of the build stage.

```bash
success Building production JavaScript and CSS bundles - 82.198s
success run queries - 82.762s - 4/4 0.05/s
success Building static HTML for pages - 19.386s - 2/2 0.10/s
+ success Delete previous page data - 1.512s
info Done building in 152.084 sec
+ info Built pages:
+ Updated page: /about
+ Updated page: /accounts/example
+ info Deleted pages:
+ Deleted page: /test

Done in 154.501 sec
```

> - `--write-to-file` creates two files in the `.cache` folder, with lists of the changes paths in the build assets (`public`) folder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `--write-to-file` creates two files in the `.cache` folder, with lists of the changed paths in the build assets (`public`) folder.
```

>   - `newPages.txt` will contain a list of paths that have changed or are new

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `newPages.txt` will contain a list of new or changed paths 
```

>   - `deletedPages.txt` will contain a list of paths that have been deleted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `deletedPages.txt` will contain a list of deleted paths
```

If there are no changed or deleted paths, then the relevant files will not be created in the `.cache` folder.

## More information

> - This enhancement works by comparing the page data from the previous build to the new page data. This creates a list of page directories that are passed to the static build process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This enhancement works by comparing the page data from the previous build to the new page data. This creates a list of page directories that are passed to the static build process.
```

> - To enable this build option you will need to set an environment variable, so you will need access to set variables in your build environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To enable this build option you will need to set an environment variable, which requires access to do so in your build environment.
```
Torn on this one, just an idea.

- This feature is not available with `gatsby develop`.

> * At the end of each build, gatsby creates a `redux.state` file in `/.cache` that contains the all previous build data. You will need to persist the `.cache/redux.state` between builds, allowing for comparison, if there is no `redux.state` file located in the `/.cache` folder then a full build will be triggered

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* At the end of each build, gatsby creates a `redux.state` file in `/.cache` that contains previous build data. You will need to persist the `.cache/redux.state` between builds, allowing for comparison. If there is no `redux.state` file located in the `/.cache` folder then a full build will be triggered
```

> * Any code or static query changes (templates, components, source handling, new plugins etc) creates a new webpack compilation hash and triggers a full build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Any code or static query changes (templates, components, source handling, new plugins etc) will prompt the creation of a new webpack compilation hash and trigger a full build.
```

> - Using the `GATSBY_EXPERIMENTAL_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES` flag should be used consistently when building your project, otherwise removing the flag will clear all cache

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: When using the `GATSBY_EXPERIMENTAL_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES` flag it is important to do so consistently when building your project. Otherwise, the cache will be cleared and the necessary data for comparison will no longer be available, removing the ability to check for incremental data changes.
```

---
title: Page Build Optimizations for Incremental Data Changes
---

> Gatsby sources data from multiple sources (CMS, static files - like Markdown, databases, APIs, etc) and creates an aggregated dataset in GraphQL. Currently, each gatsby build uses the GraphQL dataset and queries to do a complete rebuild of the whole app - ready for deployment - including static assets like HTML, JavaScript, JSON, media files, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gatsby sources data from multiple sources (CMS, static files - like Markdown, databases, APIs, etc) and creates an aggregated dataset in GraphQL. Currently, each `gatsby build` uses the GraphQL dataset and queries to do a complete rebuild of the whole app - ready for deployment - including static assets like HTML, JavaScript, JSON, media files, etc.
```
If you meant Gatsby build instead of the command that's fine as well.

Author: Updated to capital 'G' Gatsby

> Projects that have a small (10s to 100s) to medium (100s to 1000s) amount of content, deploying these sites don't present a problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For projects that have a small (10s to 100s) to medium (100s to 1000s) amount of content, deployment is not a challenge.
```

> Building sites with large amounts of content (10,000s upwards) are already relatively fast with Gatsby. However, some projects might start to experience issues when adopting CI/CD principles - continuously building and deploying. Gatsby rebuilds the complete app which means the complete app also needs to be deployed. Doing this each time a small data change occurs unnecessarily increases demand on CPU, memory, and bandwidth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even building sites with large amounts of content (10,000s upwards) are relatively fast with Gatsby. However, some projects might start to experience issues when adopting CI/CD principles - continuously building and deploying. Gatsby rebuilds the complete app which means the complete app also needs to be deployed. Doing this each time a small data change occurs unnecessarily increases demand on CPU, memory, and bandwidth.
```

One solution to these problems might be to use [Gatsby Cloud's Build features](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/cloud/).

For projects that require self-hosted environments, where Gatsby Cloud would not be an option, being able to only deploy the content that has changed or is new (incremental data changes, you might say) would help reduce build times, deployment times and demand on resources.

For more info on the standard build process please see [overview of the gatsby build process](/docs/overview-of-the-gatsby-build-process/)

## How to use

To enable this enhancement, use the environment variable `GATSBY_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES=true` in your `gatsby build` command, for example:

`GATSBY_PAGE_BUILD_ON_DATA_CHANGES=true node ./node_modules/.bin/gatsby build`

This will run the Gatsby build process, but only build pages that have data changes since your last build. If there are any changes to code (JS, CSS) the bundling process returns a new webpack compilation hash which causes all pages to be rebuilt.

### Reporting what has been built

> You might need to get a list of the pages that have been built for example, if you want to perform a sync action in your CI/CD pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may want to retrieve a list of the pages that were built. For example, if you want to perform a sync action in your CI/CD pipeline.
```

To list the paths in the build assets (`public`) folder, you can use one (or both) of the following arguments in your `build` command.

- `--log-pages` outputs the updated paths to the console at the end of the build

```bash
success Building production JavaScript and CSS bundles - 82.198s
success run queries - 82.762s - 4/4 0.05/s
success Building static HTML for pages - 19.386s - 2/2 0.10/s
+ success Delete previous page data - 1.512s
info Done building in 152.084 sec
+ info Built pages:
+ Updated page: /about
+ Updated page: /accounts/example
+ info Deleted pages:
+ Deleted page: /test

Done in 154.501 sec
```

- `--write-to-file` creates two files in the `.cache` folder, with lists of the changes paths in the build assets (`public`) folder.

  - `newPages.txt` will contain a list of paths that have changed or are new
  - `deletedPages.txt` will contain a list of paths that have been deleted

If there are no changed or deleted paths, then the relevant files will not be created in the `.cache` folder.

> The `--log-pages` parameter will output all the file paths that have been updated or deleted at the end of the build stage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `--log-pages` parameter will output all the file paths that were updated or deleted at the end of the build stage.
```

```bash
success Building production JavaScript and CSS bundles - 82.198s
success run queries - 82.762s - 4/4 0.05/s
success Building static HTML for pages - 19.386s - 2/2 0.10/s
+ success Delete previous page data - 1.512s
info Done building in 152.084 sec
+ info Built pages:
+ Updated page: /about
+ Updated page: /accounts/example
+ info Deleted pages:
+ Deleted page: /test

Done in 154.501 sec
```

## More information

- This enhancement works by comparing the page data from the previous build to the new page data. This creates a list of page directories that are passed to the static build process

- To enable this build option you will need to set an environment variable, so you will need access to set variables in your build environment

> - At the end of each build, gatsby creates a `redux.state` file in `/.cache` that containing the all previous build data. You will need to persist the `.cache/redux.state` between builds, allowing for comparison, if there is no `redux.state` file located in the `/.cache` the folder then a full build will be triggered

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- At the end of each build, gatsby creates a `redux.state` file in `/.cache` that contains the all previous build data. You will need to persist the `.cache/redux.state` between builds, allowing for comparison, if there is no `redux.state` file located in the `/.cache` folder then a full build will be triggered
```
